---
title: "Week 1: The Mississippi to the Missouri"
date: June 21, 2016
linkTitle: "Week 1"
---

![](/images/west/P1030132.jpg)


**Day 1 â€” June 13, 2016** I leave the lovely Omega house, Minneapolis,
my home, around 8, with a warm send-off from my housemates. The Dakota
Rail Trail takes me due west, miles of paved bicycling trails, out of
the cities and into farmland. American toads are trilling in fields
wet with rain. A red-winged blackbird mistakes me for a hawk and
attacks my helmet.

Soon it's just quiet county roads, an endless grid, some paved, most
dirt. I stick to the paved. I zigzag my way southwest, headed for
Sioux Falls. Long stretches of cornfields with pockets of trees,
hiding houses, or impossibly large machinery and silos. It's the
opposite of, say, Maine; instead of clearing a yard of trees, you
plant a yard of them, to have some shade and privacy.

Clouds are moving in gradients of light and dark, clear and fog. It
looks like it's raining nearby but I can't tell. The sun peeks through
occasionally. I make it to New Ulm, 100 miles.


**Day 2** Thunderstorms. The sky is murky and it's hard
to see how close they are. When I hear thunder, I start to look for
shelter. I don't want to be caught out in miles of cornfields; I'm
usually the tallest thing around. I stop at a farm that has an open
shed, ring the doorbell, though there's a cinder block in front of the
door &mdash; truck in the driveway but seems like no one's home. I
park out in the shed for an hour as it passes over. Heavy rain, but
not a lot of lightning. Surrounded by farm equipment, metal, big
tires, tubing, hay. A cat scurries across the yard. Rain seems to let
up, but then gets heavy again. Finally the thunder dies away and I
start off in the rain, changing into my swimsuit first.

![](/images/west/P1030026.jpg)

In the afternoon the sky looks bad again. Cumulonimbus peaks over dark
horizons. Clouds moving fast west. Dark sky ahead. Soon I hear the
distant thunder. I stop at the next house. A farmer greets me and says
there's a tornado watch. He offers to let me stay in the house but I
insist the shed is fine, not wanting to bother them.

His father, Clark, meets me in the shed, and we talk for a bit. The
rain picks up a little. Then harder. I see, suddenly, low clouds
coming in fast from the south. "Looking a little green." The wind hits
like a hammer. His daughter had just arrived in a minivan. "Get in the
house, take him with you."  "Who, the dog?" "Him!"  pointing at me. We
run across the yard, which has turned to complete chaos. I am drenched
in seconds. Elgene, Clark's wife, hands me a towel, and tells me about
tornadoes in the past that came near the farm. One in the 70s through
Mountain Lake. Another, called the Comfrey tornado, came right through
the center of town, then continued on, through Hanska, all the way to
St Peter and beyond. Her phone is blaring: the tornado watch has been
upgraded to a warning.

The storm passes, and I end in Windom, about 60 miles, and stay with a
generous warm showers host.


**Day 3** Strong headwinds today. 60 miles, and they are tough. My
right knee is a little sore by the end. I camp at Blue Mounds state
park, in the southwest corner of Minnesota. It provides needed relief
by way of relief. Out of the flat plains rise a hill, and then a
quartzite cliff. Above the cliff are a herd of bison, kept by the
park. Below the cliff, a large number of bison bones have been
found. One theory is that Native Americans would hunt them by
stampeding them off the cliff.

![](/images/west/P1030072.jpg)

![](/images/west/P1030066.jpg)


**Day 4** Temps will be hitting the 90s today. I have a short 30 miles
into Sioux Falls, South Dakota, and finish the day early. I meet up
with Mark, a warm showers host, who helps me plan my South Dakota
route. He points out the way I had been planning takes me into very
remote territory with services few and far between. We agree that at
some point I should head north, to I90, with its relative bounty of
towns and twenty-four hour gas stations. For the most part I won't
need to ride the interstate (legal in South Dakota) as there is a
parallel service road.

Mark generously drives me to the local bike shop, where I install a
third water bottle cage. With the help of my steel insulated growler,
I can easily carry 5.5 liters now.


**Day 5** Rest day in Sioux Falls. Strong thunderstorm in the evening.


**Day 6** I leave Sioux Falls at 6:30 to beat any Saturday morning
traffic getting out of the city. Branches and some trees are down from
last night. I wind my way down to Highway 44, which cuts a straight
line west to the Missouri. And I mean <em>straight</em>.

![](/images/west/P1030090.jpg)

My plan had been to end the day in Parkston. When I arrive there
around noon, it's not much of a town. There are two places to get a
beer: Sud&rsquo;s, and Boogs (pronounced more like
"bugs"). Sud&rsquo;s or Boogs. Boogs is a dimly lit biker bar that
smells like urine. Sud&rsquo;s is a little windowless shack, but they
did have one beer that wasn't Budweiser, so I stop there for a rest.

Meanwhile a tail wind picks up. It's very difficult to pass up a tail
wind here, so I gear up for another 45 miles to the next town,
Platte. All told I bike 120 miles today. There are a few pretty river
valleys on the way. Mostly, though, it's corn.

![](/images/west/P1030091.jpg)

South Dakota presents a few problems for a cyclist. There is no
shade. There are simply no trees by the side of the road. You might
find a patch that is sort of close to the road, or down a dirt road. I
had only a few reasonable patches of shade between Parker and Platte,
a distance of 86 miles.

There are also few services. Even when a town is listed on the map, it
might only consist of one or two houses. And the houses along the way,
where they exist, are generally not along the main road, but a
half-mile down a dirt road. There's often nowhere to stop and ask for
water without a big detour.


**Day 7** 5:00am: The strawberry moon sets over the
plains as I leave Platte and bike west. I keep my lights on until the
sun breaks behind me. There's little traffic except for trucks pulling
boats to the river. I coast down into the river valley as the sun hits
the hills on the far shore.

![](/images/west/P1030113.jpg)

Crosswind from the south has picked up. Across the mile-long bridge
over the Missouri it roars. I have to walk my bike across to avoid
falling over. Whitecaps dance north. I look down and
see... fish. Hundreds, thousands. No idea what they are.

![](/images/west/P1030128.jpg)

West of the Missouri there are hills. <em>Big</em> hills. Over the
course of the day I will have climbed more elevation than when I
crossed the White Mountains on the Kancamagus highway. And much of it
is steeper here. It's a slog.

This is easily the most beautiful part of the trip so far, yet I can't
stop to enjoy it (sorry, no photos). I'm worried about the heat, which
is forecast to hit 100F by early afternoon. It's already hot. There is
also nothing, no towns, along my ride today, some 70 miles. I&rsquo;m
pushing myself to beat the sun.

I start to run low on water still 15 miles from my destination &mdash;
a gas station in a tiny town called Reliance. It's around 11:00, and
probably 95F. Lucky for me, I come across a house on the side of the
road. Old cars and trucks are scattered around the property. An old
man meets me at the door, Bob, in a swarm of barn swallows and
wasps. The swallows are nesting in the roof above. I hold up two empty
water bottles, and he brings me inside. The house is completely full
of stuff, stacks and stacks, whatever it is (I am too hot and thirsty
to pay attention). His wife Arlene greets me, fills my water bottles,
and offers one last pancake from their breakfast, and an orange,
delightfully refrigerated. We sit and chat a little while I guzzle
water. Bob's parents had built the house, and his mother wanted it
near the road so she could meet people passing by. Bob and Arlene are
in their seventies and still working, Bob at Ford, Arlene at a couple
of jobs, still pulling sixty hour weeks. Bob says he works "part time"
by which he means forty hours. They seem pleasantly surprised to meet
me, but there's something a little awkward in our conversation, like
they don't usually entertain guests. Arlene insists I have another
orange as I leave.

I reach the gas station at around 1:30, completely spent and not
feeling well. It's 100F out. I buy three liters of gatorade. For about
two hours, I am defeated. Given the option I would have caught the
next bus home to Minneapolis. But that feeling fades, along with the
heat of the day, as I nurse myself back to health in the air
conditioned gas station. In the late afternoon I limp on another
thirteen miles to the next town, Kennebec, to get a motel. The setting
sun illuminates plumes of thunderheads to the distant east. I hear the
next day there were storms in Sioux Falls. That's looking two days
away.

![](/images/west/P1030137.jpg)
