---
title: "Week 4: Yellowstone"
linkTitle: "Week 4"
date: July 25, 2016
---

**Day 22 &mdash; July 4**
I turn north and ride to Red Lodge, just over the Montana border, 62
miles. I'm following Charles's advice and, instead of continuing west
directly into Yellowstone, loop around the mountains to position
myself at the foot of the Beartooth.

This is my first night in grizzly country, and at a campground just
outside of town I stash my food panniers in a shed (I reserve my front
bags for food only, in case I need to hang them) and sleep next to my
bear spray. The weather looks promising for an attempt at the pass
tomorrow, and I try to get an early night amid the booms, alternating
thunder and fireworks.


**Day 23**
The air is still and crisp, the sun is beginning to find its way into
the dark spruce of the narrow valley. I follow US 212 up Rock Creek
toward the Beartooth.

I scan the horizon, looking for a dip in the mountain wall, over which
a road could be built. Steep walls become steeper. The valley bends
and then straightens, opening out. Rock Creek valley was scooped out
by a glacier into a long U shape. The only apparent way out is to go
back.

![](/images/west/P1030792.jpg)

Undaunted, the road runs straight up the wall in a series of
switchbacks.  Whoever designed Beartooth Pass had more imagination
than I do. The grade is steady. Bikeable. I look straight down to see
where I was five miles back. This is an elevator.

At some 9,000 feet elevation there is a rest area. A biker who passed
me earlier, pumping his fists, finds me, full of enthusiasm for my
climb. I eat some bananas, fending off impudent squirrels.

![](/images/west/P1030822.jpg)

Up I go. A mountain goat stands on an outcrop, watching me. The
switchbacks end on a high plateau covered in grasses and
wildflowers. The road straightens and maintains a steady climb. I'm
biking on tundra. The subsoil here is permanently frozen.

The wind, no longer restricted by valley walls, hits me head on. I'm
biking on molasses. Every fifty yards I stop to catch my breath. There
is only blasting in my ears.

I cross back over the Wyoming border at some 10,000 feet, and curl up
behind the sign, refuge from the wind. A short break gives me time to
think. What am I doing here? This is crazy. I should hitchhike to the
top.

Better get on the bike and stop thinking. Slowly, slowly make
progress.

In the distance, a small, sharp glacial horn: the Bear's Tooth.

![](/images/west/P1030832.jpg)

I reach a false summit and descend for a mile or so before climbing
again. More switchbacks. In the high wind I crawl up one section, and
then, taking the U-turn, I'm almost pushed up the mountain by the
wind.

Six hours in, I make the pass. I find a stranger to take the
photo. 10,947 feet. The rocks behind me are arranged in geometric
patterns, naturally, from the constant thawing and freezing of the
ground.

![](/images/west/P1030840.jpg)

On the western slope of the plateau, the road twists around alpine
lakes and meadows, rocky hills speckled with spruce, white patches of
snow not yet melted.

![](/images/west/P1030852.jpg)

I descend, falling at twenty miles an hour off the plateau into a high
river valley, the Clark Fork Yellowstone. The pyramidal Pilot Peak of
the Absarokas rises behind birch and spruce forests. A few mosquitoes
greet me. The wind is gone. I climb again &mdash; Colter Pass, up to
Cooke City, a little tourist town where I find a burger and beer. From
Cooke City, twenty miles of gentle descent into Yellowstone's
northeast entrance.

A car pulls off ahead of me and a couple gets out with cameras. Two
great horned owl chicks in a nest, right over the road. I coast by
slowly. They stare, two fuzzy heads, four big eyes following me.

The road narrows in thick forest. Traffic is light. I sing, letting
animals know I'm coming.

<i>Wonder who is it, waiting for me. At the end of heartbreak
road.</i>

The forest opens to meadow. A solitary bison grazes.

<i>Hope that she'll be tender. Someone I can know.</i>

I end the long day at Pebble Creek campground, in the opening valley
with sides of forested mountains and rocky cliffs, quiet, serene. The
elevation here is 6,900 feet.


**Day 24**
Morning in the shadow of the eastern mountains. The road
gently twists into the glacially carved Lamar valley, full of grazing
buffalo.

There is a strange white mound, porous travertine, terraced edifice of
precipitated limestone from an exinct hot spring. Hanging in back are
cliff swallow nests.

Traffic, clustered, moves slowly. A group is pulled over, watching the
hills for wolves, talking with a ranger, who has been following a pack
for years. He has set up a spotting scope on their den on a far
hill. They aren't home. Early this morning we watched them leave, he
says, the whole pack, seven pups in tow.

A dip in the land brings me across the Yellowstone river, shallow,
fast-moving. Futher upstream it carves a steeper canyon.

A few miles from here is the caldera, the enormous volcano, collapsed
into itself, beneath which lies a huge pool of magma. The land is
getting weird. Across the canyon, a perfect line of dark columnar
jointing is exposed, an ancient river of basalt.

![](/images/west/P1030920.jpg)

I camp at Tower Falls next to Alessandra and Michele, Italians on a
cycle tour through as many national parks as possible, headed south to
Utah. They have just begun their trip, fresh, ebullient. Later we are
joined by [Rob], tall, bearded, English, long on a tour begun in
Florida in February that looped around from California. He's now
heading to Denver. We collect around Rob's picnic table (we love
these, say the Italians, in Europe you must bring your own chair to
campgrounds). He opens three packets of Ramen and a can of tuna into a
boiling pot. 35Â¢ each, the chef remarks. You are a great &mdash; cook,
says Michele, grasping for a word. No, you are a great <i>eater</i>,
corrects Alessandra.

[Rob]: https://www.crazyguyonabike.com/doc/?o=tS&doc_id=17243&v=NM

We trade stories and tips. I warn the Italians about the heat. I
carried six liters of water once in South Dakota, I boast. Rob says, I
carried seventeen liters in the deserts of Nevada. And I drank all but
two of those. Seventeen, I repeat, eyes wide.

Michele says, when the English come to Italy, they all wear shorts and
t-shirts during the winter.


**Day 25**
Ice on my tent in the morning. I'm the first cyclist packed up and on
my way, and say goodbye to the Italians. Rob and I plan a rendezvous
at West Thumb. There are few cars this early. I sing again for the
bears.

<i>Just a little lovin. Early in the mornin.</i>

It's a slow, moderately long climb up to Dunraven pass, between Tower
Falls and Canyon. Bands of fog lap canyon walls behind me.

<i>Beats a cup of coffee. For startin off the day...  </i>

I spend a few hours on a hiking detour to summit Mt. Washburn, which
has a panormic view of the north side of the park. To the northeast, I
see the crags and snow of the Beartooth. To the south, where I'm
headed, the Yellowstone cuts a gorge through hills and leads to a wide
area of flat, forested land, as far as I can see: the caldera.

![](/images/west/P1030952.jpg)

There are bubbling, sulfuric hot springs along the road. When I arrive
at Yellowstone Lake parts of the shore are steaming. A cave that
contains a hot spring sputters steam and produces strange gurgling
sounds. Tourists flock here. We are standing on a giant moka pot. One
that has exploded every six hundred thousand years, sending
thousand-degree pychrocastic flow out to the Tetons, ash clouds around
the globe, causing mass extinctions.

The last explosion was six hundred thousand years ago.


**Day 26**
Before leaving camp I visit Rob, who has his tent in a nearby
site. Rob quit his job for this trip. When he gets to Denver, he's
flying to Madrid, and from there will bicycle back to England. I ask
him what he thinks of American drivers. They're nice enough, he says,
but act as though they've never seen a bicycle. He finds it funny that
oncoming traffic will sometimes slow down, yielding space to cars
behind the cyclist that are already yielding, causing chaos.

It's a gentle climb through lodgepole pine forest to the Continental
Divide &mdash; but only to kiss it. After a rolling hill or two, I'm
back in the Mississippi watershed. While I'm attempting to photograph
an airborn selfie, a cyclist rolls up to say hi. He has no panniers,
just a backpack, but I see he is traveling across country: scraggily
beard, deep tan, a familiar cheeriness. [Carl] rides one hundred miles
a day and sleeps under a tarp. I love Wyoming, he says. In the deserts
I slept out under the stars. One night the wind died down, and I
decided to take advantage and ride some more. It only takes me a few
minutes to pack my gear, then I was riding under the stars, no towns
in sight, no cars.

[Carl]: http://quarlllonabike.blogspot.com/

Later, I see Carl again at Old Faithful. He's sitting on a bench
waiting for the show. This is Disneyland, he said. I can't believe
it. Old Faithful even runs on a schedule. Crowds gather. Carl extols
the pleasures of riding with a couple sitting next to him. What was
your favorite part?  He tells them about Wyoming. But what was the
hardest part?  Missouri. Missouri is a hot, humid hell. You sweat and
nothing evaporates, and you don't stop sweating. Salt stains grow on
your clothes. A couple sitting on his other side are nodding their
heads. We're from Missouri, they say, we hear ya. When your clothes
dry out they crinkle like paper.

Old Faithful goes off. We all clap. Carl says, driving is like
teleportation. You move so quickly, you're in a new place before you
can even start to process the transition. I agree, I say, but
Yellowstone to me feels like teleportation, even on a bike.

I stop at a few more geyser basins along the road. Cars are parked
along the road for miles. On the boardwalks, wind washes us in the
steam from hot springs, stinking of sulfur, summoning a great
collective groan.

![](/images/west/P1040015.jpg)

![](/images/west/P1040024.jpg)

I head west, out of the park, happy to be leaving. In the distance are
the rugged Henrys Lake mountains, the Contental Divide, along which
runs the Montana-Idaho border.

Montana. I cross the border and exit Yellowstone.

![](/images/west/P1040028.jpg)


**Day 27**
I ride north, into a narrow valley, passing a lake full of dead trees
standing in its waters. This is not an artificial lake, but one
created in 1959 by an earthquake. Earthquake Lake. The tremors,
largest recorded in the northern Rockies, broke an enormous dolomite
wedge protruding from a steep ridge, holding in place an outcrop of
unstable metamorphic rock. Thirty-seven million cubic yards of rock
were suddenly airborn, headed into the valley. As it fell, the air
underneath was compressed and exploded outward. A campground happened
to be in the way. Cars and people flew from the blast of wind. The
rocks buried everything else, and slid (perhaps lubricated by the
cushion of compressed air) up the opposite valley wall, some four
hundred feet.

The wall of debris dammed the Madison River and created the lake.

Bald eagles fly over the remains of the old forest, trunks drowned
dead white standing above the water. A few bands of dark clouds move
over the mountains. It rains a few drops in the valley. The wind picks
up.

On top of the debris pile sit two enormous boulders. They were once
sitting on the opposite ridge.

![](/images/west/P1040066.jpg)

A strong, constant south wind blows in my favor today. The bike
practically rides itself to Ennis, Montana. I camp at an RV park.

**Day 28 &amp; 29**
Storms forecast, as well as snow in the mountains. I decide to take
two days off, and get a motel. I have some work to catch up on, and
also, my back has been hurting since Beartooth, which no amount of
stretching has helped.

