---
title: "Week 2: The Black Hills"
date: June 28, 2016
linkTitle: "Week 2"
---

![](/images/west/P1030401.jpg)


**Day 8 — June 20** The motel hosts breakfast in the office, around a
little table. A menagerie of travelers filters through. Forced to eat
next to each other, we talk origins and destinations. One man, who
looks like a character out of a western (like many men here) is moving
from Tuscon to Wisconsin ("too much traffic now, you can't live
there"). A family with three young children is headed from Wisconsin
to Montana for the summer ("can you pass the napkins, he just
spilled"). A tall thin man with white hair is on his motorcycle headed
home to Vancouver from a niece's wedding in Iowa ("no, I didn't stay
at any hog farms"). An older couple with tattoos and Sturgis tees are
on their way from Wyoming to Pennsylvania. We chat about Wyoming. They
tell me to avoid beartooth mountain pass, tiny road with lots of
switchbacks. When I say I'm on a bicycle, the big man leans back in
his chair and declares "I respect that."

The affinity between motorcyclists ("bikers" out west) and bicycle
tourists is unclear, but it is there. I find that bikers are the most
likely to wave at me of any motorized traffic. (A close second are
pickup trucks, then &mdash; rarely &mdash; cars. I don't think an SUV
has ever waved.) Sometimes an entire passing gang will remove their
left hand from the handlebars and produce peace signs, pointed low. A
little thing but I love this.

Forty miles to Murdo today. Taking it easy.



**Day 9** 5:30 departure. Again I have the moon setting in the west to
guide my way. The air is cool and there is a slight breeze from the
south. For the first thirty miles or so, riding on the service road
along I90, no cars pass me.

After many miles of gently rolling hills, I come to Cactus Flat
&mdash; not really a town, just an RV park and a general store at the
entrance to the Badlands.

Families are rolling through at a steady pace on their way to the
Badlands. I sit on a bench in front of the store for a while and
listen to them. Nearly everyone seems to be having a bad time. A
father calls his daughter a "little turd" and "she can stay in the car
and sweat." A mother berates her two sons for running. The children
are annoyed. The parents are exasperated. This is how people spend
their vacations: for the most part, driving, and bored.

I stay at the RV park. Before I set up my tent, clouds form in the
west, frothy and dark. Soon a storm comes through and rains heavily
with strong winds. I watch from the office. After the rain lets up,
the ground dries instantly. The water seems to fall straight through
the soil.  The storms head east and the billowing thunderheads catch
the setting sun. As the light dims in the dusk I watch the lightning
strobe in the distance.

![](/images/west/P1030220.jpg)


**Day 10** A strong north wind howls all night, gusting up to 40mph. I
keep checking outside my tent for storms, but the skies are clear. I
leave the campground at 6.

In the distance, a jagged line of sand-colored spires glowing in the
sun. The Badlands. I stop to take a quiet hike. A few other people are
up now. The entire landscape has transformed: severe, either nearly
flat and walkable or vertical and crumbling, towers of strata sculpted
by erosion.

![](/images/west/P1030260.jpg)

![](/images/west/P1030243.jpg)

In the middle of the day I climb the steep, dusty soil to the high
prairie, then walk through the grasses and watch out for cacti. The
wind is calm, the heat of the day is not quite oppressive, and all is
quiet, save for one friendly western meadowlark. There are the track
of bighorn sheep in the path but I don't see any. In a hole next to
the path, I see a rattlesnake curled up. It seems small, probably
young, and doesn't move.

I set up tent at the busy Cedar Pass campground. A few other
bicyclists arrive and we talk for a bit. Nate and Martha have come
from New Hampshire, some 2,000 miles. They are feeling down about
headwinds. We're thinking of catching a bus from Rapid through
Wyoming, Nate says. Just skip the prairie. He points to a section of
my Wyoming map I've spread out. I don't think there's anything here,
for 80 miles. Are you worried about water? No, it's just boring!

I take a shower and begin to organize for an early morning departure,
but a voice calls out, You want some hot food? I sit down for a meal
with Wayne and Sally, two friendly East Tennesseans (they are sure to
specify East). Wayne is a hiker, and he dreams of some day taking six
months for the US continental divide trail. He looks at my bike with
admiration and perhaps some envy. You're doing exactly what he wants
to do, Sally says. Wayne hands me a beer. We've got to get rid of
these anyway. Then another. By the third beer he doesn't say anything,
just puts it in my hand. You've got to come to the Smokies. We shut
down an entire road &mdash; <em>the</em> major road going through the
mountains &mdash; for a day in October. The New River Gorge Bridge,
1,000 feet over the New River rapids. And do you know what happens?
Base jumpers and rappellers, going off the bridge the whole
day. Fucking great. You've got to come see it. That'd be perfect if
you were biking the blue ridge.

Well-fed and inebriated, I hit the tent. In the dimming light comes a
beautiful bird call, piercing, warbling but precise. A whip-poor-will?
The meadowlark? I don't know my birds around here.


**Day 11** I leave the campground at 5. Puffs of clouds move in from
the south and the sun ignites their tops. There is no wind and I move
through the dark spires in peace. This is how to see the badlands: on
a bike, early in the morning, before the sun, heat, and mobs of
tourists.

![](/images/west/P1030315.jpg)

I exit the park, and head back to I90. I take the interstate for
twenty miles or so, until the next service road. A tailwind develops
and I sail along on the wide, smooth shoulders. Passing semis give me
even more boost.

In the horizon a dark band grows larger: the Black Hills. The hills
are covered in pine trees, ponderosa pine. There is no transition: the
plains end, and then they start.

Rapid City lies at the base of the hills. I stop at a bike shop to
replace my worn chain. The mechanic, Matt, talks to me for a bit. He's
from Kansas — couldn't wait to leave — and never thought he would end
up in South Dakota. When I moved here, I fell in love with the area,
he said. The mountain biking is great. Winters are nice, the air is
dry. Not like in the east. He lets me store my bags at the shop while
I go run some errands, and points me to a brewery across the
street. Much better than firehose, they just opened, really great. I
stop in and have an early afternoon beer, a cactus saison, a little
bitter and sour, delicious.

Matt's right: it <em>is</em> drier here. It's a hot day, mid 90s, but
even in the midday sun the biking is tolerable. Sweat works well when
it can evaporate.

I spend the night outside of Rapid with Fred and Sherry, who host on
warmshowers. Their back porch has an incredible view into a steep
gorge. Bighorn sheep watch us eat dinner from a nearby hill. They walk
right below us, Sherry says, pointing off the railing. But that's a
cliff! I know, and I have no idea how they do it.

![](/images/west/P1030347.jpg)


**Day 12** Packing up my bike, Fred wonders what it all weighs. I'm
not sure, and he brings out a scale. The bags weigh sixty pounds. The
bike and equipment strapped to the rack is probably another
twenty. I'm 142. All told, I'm pushing somewhere around 220 pounds.

Fred and Sherry ride up with me for a few miles. Fred rides a
recumbent. It looks nice, easy on the back. We part ways at Norris
Peak road, and I bike on into the hills and canyons of the Black
Hills.

![](/images/west/P1030354.jpg)

At some point I pull off on an old trail and relax under a tree. It's
nearly impossible to see me from the road, but a car stops right in
front of me and starts to turn around. The driver sees me. Hey, you
hungry? No, I'm OK, thanks. Want a banana? A banana? Sure! (A cyclist
should never turn down a banana.) He hands me a business
card. Blessing be upon you, he said, and drove off.

I coast into Deadwood. The canyon turns steep; sharp cliffs around the
road. The town is nestled in the canyon, looking up at steep pine
covered ridges. A thunderstorm passes over and produces three rainbows
at once. I tent out in the yard of a warmshowers host, Jesse. It's
Jesse's birthday and she takes me out to No. 10 Saloon with her
friends and family for drinks. It's absolutely packed. Slot machines
and many men with cowboy hats.


**Day 13** I get up early and make myself breakfast. Jesse's parents,
Bruce and Cheri, are soon up and we chat away for hours on the
porch. Bruce, who looks a little like Tommy Lee Jones and has a much
more soothing voice, loves to tell stories, and it's hard to tear
myself away, even though I need to get going.

It's a long climb up into Lead, and then up over a pass into Cheyenne
Crossing. There's a cafe and I stop for a burger. When I go back
outside, the canyon is filled with smoke. I ask around. Wildfires,
west of Spearfish, a man says. Well, I'm headed to Spearfish, do you
think it's safe?  Should be. I ask a few others and the consensus is
that I'll be fine. Spearfish is at the end of a twenty-mile descent
through Spearfish Canyon, and the idea of arriving at the bottom only
to turn around and flee from a fire made me nervous.

I descend into the gorge. Towering faces of exposed rock showcase the
strata of the Black Hills. The creek runs over ancient and hard
Precambrian rock, and the high walls it has cut through are limestone
and shale, much with a red and pink tint. I swerve to avoid cars
parked by the hundreds along the road for trout fishing.

![](/images/west/P1030420.jpg)

The air clears in Spearfish. Heading north, I can see far to the
origin of the smoke, a wildfire on the top of a mountain a few miles
off.

![](/images/west/P1030426.jpg)

I spend the night in Belle Fourche at a quiet campground.


**Day 14** Bike is rolling at 6. Although the weather has been cooler
and less humid, I still prefer to leave early. There is hardly any
traffic on the road, the sun is weak, and the birds are out. I am
thankful to be traveling to the west, with my back is to the rising
sun. It's 7am when I pass into Wyoming.

I arrive at Devil's Tower later in the day. It's unlike anything I've
seen. I take quite a few photos, biking and hiking around it.

![](/images/west/P1030470.jpg)

Enormous hexagonal columns reach up into the sky. Devil's Tower an
intrusion of magma into the surrounding softer sedimentary rock, which
has been eroded away. Geologists aren't sure whether it's the neck of
an extinct volcano or a laccolith, which forms beneath the surface.

There appears to be a slight twist at the base visible from the
western side, as though a giant hand reached down and, grasping the
upper half of the tower, cranked slightly counter-clockwise.

![](/images/west/P1030475.jpg)

I stay at Frank Sander's compound. Take the second left once you're in
the park, he tells me on the phone. There aren't any signs. If you get
lost, just ask anyone where Crazy Frank is. Crazy Frank runs a bed and
breakfast and also guides rock climbers up the tower. (The regular
cracks in the columns running up the tower afford excellent climbing,
so I'm told.)  He also likes to give passing cyclists a place to
tent. I arrive and introduce myself to a group of climbers. Turns out
we're all from Minneapolis. Ah, which route did you take?  They're
attempting to summit tomorrow, and plan to leave at 2:30am. It's a
southern route and the rock bakes in the sun, so it's advisable to do
early.

I briefly consider waking up with them to photograph the light of
their headlamps on the rock. On second thought: I made it to
Wyoming. I'm sleeping in!
