---
title: "Week 3: Wyoming"
linkTitle: "Week 3"
date: July 13, 2016
---

![](/images/west/P1030582.jpg)


**Day 15 &mdash; June 27**
I leave Frank's at a reasonable hour and coast down the road circling
the monument. The sky is hazy with smoke from a wildfire forty miles
south. Thanks to light winds it had been contained overnight, and I'm
not worried about it. Prairie dogs, standing alert, make their <i>chee
chee chee</i> call as I pass and run to their burrows, which they
build close together as villages. I chatter with them. Prairie dogs,
social and smart, apparently have a sophisticated language to describe
to each other dangers they see: "tall human wearing blue." Maybe they
have a word for bicycle.

A few miles down the road I run into Martha and Nate, the cyclists I
met in the Badlands. You're going the wrong way! I advise. We looped
around south and want to check out Devil's Tower, Nate says. So you're
not going take a bus from Rapid then? Nah, we're biking. That day in
the Badlands, we just felt so tired after those headwinds. I
understand completely. I give them directions to Frank's and wish them
well.

I make it to Gillette, 60 miles, and splurge on a motel, escaping the
heat.


**Day 16**
Gillette to Buffalo is some 70 miles and nearly all of it must be
ridden on I90. I get started at 6:30. There is hardly any
wind. Traffic is light. I pass another cycle tourist, who doesn't seem
to want to talk. It's a long day on the highway and I suppose he wants
to stay focused.

The country here is gently rolling, arid, full of sagebrush. This is
the Powder River basin, stretching north to south 100 miles wide, the
trough between the Black Hills and Bighorn uplifts. There are
occasionally small reddish mesas near the road. Through the basin, old
Paleocene and Eocene swamps were buried under thousands of feet of
sediment to cook under pressure and form enormous coal beds. The
overlying sediment has since eroded away. Exposed coal seams caught
fire, and the heat metamorphosed surrounding sandstone and shale into
bricks and ceramics called clinker. Those are the mesas.

About fifty miles away from Buffalo I see what I first think are a
series of small clouds in the distance. Snowcaps! The Bighorns emerge
from the haze as I get closer and then a dramatic view as I descend
into the valley. Big, broad, cutting a sharp line from the basin.

![](/images/west/P1030527.jpg)

In Buffalo I stay at a campground, the Mountain View, which has a
special price for passing bicycle tourists. I meet Allen, who works
here in trade for parking his camper. He's especially friendly to
cyclists and is planning a tour of his own around Wyoming. He studies
my equipment with interest. So that's a non-stick pan? Yep. Most
cyclists that come through here use one of those titanium pots. Really
lightweight. I like your idea though.

He sees my crocs. About half the cyclists have a pair of those, he
says. I should get myself a pair. Do they ride in them too? You ride
in those? Everyday. Well, that's a first.

Allen has a deep, baritone voice with a hint of Texas, a Southern
affability and comfort in conversation. We sit and chat for hours. It
turns out we both carry ukuleles, and we play some John Prine to the
campground courtyard.


**Day 17**
Today I had planned the big climb over the Bighorns, but my legs are
feeling tired, so I take a rest day. In the morning I have coffee with
Allen and Jack, more part-time help at the Mountain View. Jack wears
motorcycle jackets with holes in the elbows. He squints at me behind
an elegant beard and smiles. Don't worry about the brown bear, he
reassures me. They won't hurt you. Just throw 'em a little food,
they'll leave you be. Jack speaks slowly and softly, almost a
whisper. Wolves, don't worry about them. Look them straight in the
eye. Throw 'em a little food.

I thought you weren't supposed to look them in the eyes, I
say. Bullshit, Jack says, I've trained wolves. Now, black bears,
they're squirrelly. Watch out for them. Never turn your back. And
cougars...

Allen jumps in. I've never heard of anyone being eaten by a cougar
here. Only out in California. Here they keep their distance. I
wouldn't worry about them.

Later, I buy a can of bear spray. $50.


**Day 18**
I awake at 3:30, ready to start packing up for an early departure, to
avoid hitting thunderstorms at elevation, but lightning is flashing in
the night. A storm is coming in from the mountain, unusual at this
time. I check the forecast. Storms predicted all day, especially up at
the pass. Another rest day it is.

In the afternoon I go to the Mountain View office and talk with
Charles, the owner. Charles, before settling down to run a motel and
campground, has ridden his motorcycle over most of the roads west of
Buffalo. I want his advice on getting to Yellowstone. I point to
Riverton Wyoming, just south of Thermopolis and the Wind River
canyon. I'm planning biking down here and then coming up through
Dubois into the Grand Tetons, I say. Charles studies the map. Yeah,
the Grand Tetons are pretty, but a lot of the views are obscured by
the foothills. He strokes his beard. For a lot of the ride, you won't
be seeing that much. That's OK, I say, as long as it's worth it in the
end.

His eyes move north. This, he says, putting a finger down, is the most
beautiful road in the country. That's the road I would take, if I were
you. I look at the map. The road, crossing up into Montana briefly,
degenerates into a series of squiggles, as though an earthquake
interrupted the cartographer. It's the pass over the Beartooth
Mountains. The road I'd been warned about by the bikers only a week
ago. The road with dizzying switchbacks at 11,000 feet. I don't think
I can do that, I say. It's what I would do, says Charles, if I were
you.

Change of plans. Beartooth Mountains it is.


**Day 19**
Again, I'm up at 3:30. The forecast looks good. I'm packed and on the
road by 4:15, a touch of blue horizon in the east sky. A light breeze
greets me with cool mountain air. The climb begins. It's a steep
fifteen miles or so of grades around 7 and 8 percent. I have shorts
and two top layers on and when I stop climbing I'm cold. The heat of
South Dakota is a fading memory.

![](/images/west/P1030557.jpg)

I take it slowly and little by little make progress up the slope. The
long climb appears to end, but I'm not even close to the pass. A
series of rolling, gentle hills bring me through an alpine forest: a
broad, high plateau, somewhere between 7 and 9,000 feet. Through one
half-mile stretch there is an inch or two of snow covering the
ground. The cool air smells strongly of spruce. The forest is bright
with sun and dew. In patches silvery lupine cover the undergrowth, a
mosiac of purple and green. I eat my third banana of the morning with
some peanut butter. Traffic picks up a little.  The rocky peaks of
Bighorn and Darton only occasionally come into view above the trees.

![](/images/west/P1030574.jpg)

![](/images/west/P1030560.jpg)

Thirty million years ago the Rockies in Wyoming were buried, in their
own eroded sediment and volcanic ash and sand from the west, nearly to
their tops. This is what cooked the Powder River coal. Along the
shoulders of the Bighorns, and in other Wyoming ranges, the high plain
remains. I am biking over the old Miocene fill.

Five and a half hours into the climb, I make the Powder River pass:
9,666 feet. I eat a celebratory PB&amp;J, with the last of mom's
strawberry jam.

On the way down, a bull moose trots into the road fifty yards ahead of
me. I hit the brakes. He notices and turns, comes up the road toward
me a bit, then stops. A very large animal. I slowly walk the bike
backward. We stare at each other for about a minute until a car comes,
and he vanishes into the woods.

The valley taking me down opens into the expansive Ten Sleep
Canyon. The highway rides high along the northern wall. Above me are
enormous sandstone outcrops. It is a gentle meander down to Ten
Sleep. The best kind of sign announces: 6% grade, next 18 miles.

![](/images/west/P1030618.jpg)

Behind me, thunderheads bloom, bright white under the sun. I don't
have to worry: shelter is to the west, and it's all downhill. This is
not so for five other cyclists I pass today, headed up. Five cyclists,
three different groups. Some coming from Oregon, some Washington, some
Montana. One couple is headed to Minnesota. Apparently they had
clustered in Ten Sleep waiting for a clear day to attempt the pass.

![](/images/west/P1030668.jpg)

I stop and talk to a few. One asks me if I had heard about the cyclist
killed by a grizzly in Glacier, just a few days ago. I had not.

All told, 63 miles to Ten Sleep. I tent out in an RV park next to some
friendly bikers, who ask whether I need a motor. Here, you can have
the Honda's! (Laughter.)

**Day 20**
Breakfast at Dirty Sally's in Ten Sleep before leaving. The owners are
a funky young couple, engaged in a conversation about fossils with an
old farmer who's here for coffee. I butt in (fascinated with Wyoming
geology) and end up buying an extra copy of the Roadside Geology from
them.

![](/images/west/P1030685.jpg)

It's a 53 mile ride to Greybull, heading north up a river
valley. Storm clouds pass west to east in the distance, and more
develop over the Bighorns to the east. I consider a longer ride, but
by the time I'm in Greybull there are storms in the way.

I stay at an RV park, which has a reasonable tent rate, $10. The KOA
in town would have charged me $35.


**Day 21**
I cross the Bighorn basin on US 14 to Cody: 53 miles, almost due
west. Much like the Powder River basin, it's arid and flat. I get
started early, 5:30.

Early mornings it is for the westbound cyclist. Little traffic, a low
sun to the back, cool air. The west winds are sleeping. There is
birdsong in the air and a sense of making good time. I beat the
thunderstorms which roll across the basins every afternoon. The
tradeoff is that packing up in the morning feels rushed. I'll even
skip coffee if the forecast looks particularly bad.

![](/images/west/P1030695.jpg)

I make it to Cody before the winds howl, and they do howl all
afternoon. A few storms roll through. It's the 3rd of July in a
tourist town, and the RV park has only one tent spot left &mdash; or
rather, there are no more tent spots, but they can fit me in the yard
next to the office, underneath a giant Burger King nightlight.

In the evening I attend the Cody rodeo, a big event made bigger on the
eve of the 4th. The announcer, riding his horse around the arena, is a
stream of personality, constant booming over the microphone, some mix
of sports announcer, preacher, and radio talk show host. Much time is
spent in tribute to America, Jesus, and the armed forces. An old
cowboy sings the anthem in a warbling voice; behind him, a horse
begins to buck and a cowboy goes flying. Other cowboys replace their
Stetsons and swarm to contain it. The announcer asks any spectator who
has served &mdash; army, marines, air force, coast guard, active duty
or reserve &mdash; to please stand, and a solid tenth of the bleachers
moves up to applause.

The bareback competition starts. First up is Dart: great buckin'
horse. Dart darts into the arena, his rider holding with one arm
(which appears to be supported by some sort of cast) until the fierce
bucks force a second hand down for support. Folks, he was eight
hundredths of a second from setting a score. Next up is Medicine Bags,
who like Dart bucks heartily enough to prevent a score. Fallen
Stetsons accumulate. Next up: Bar Fever. And the rider's name is Wynn
First Ratliff. Yes his first name is really Wynn, and his middle name
is really First. Wynn keeps his hat on and his hand up. 80 points,
loud cheers.

My attention moves beyond the arena to a different performance. A rip
in the clouds, a storm coming down from the Absarokas, a body of rain,
wisps and tendrils, glowing blue and gold under a setting sun.

![](/images/west/P1030738.jpg)
