---
title: "Book review: Field Notes From An Unintentional Birder (â˜…)"
date: 2021-07-25T11:00:00-0400
---

I bought this book by chance from Porter Square Books, after waiting in a long
line in the rain during a more stringent lockdown period, in February, looking
for a book to get for my friend Sam's birthday. Sam read it and let me borrow
it, and I read it mostly on the plane flying out to Wyoming to go rock climbing
with Sam. And, of course, to go birding.

The descriptions of a first-time birder learning this new, odd activity are
enjoyable, and often I would nod along or laugh in recognition. At one point,
among an experienced birding group, the author, Julia Zarankin, mistakes a green
heron for a hummingbird, which is an absurd, almost unbelievable
misidentification, except that I know how shapes and movements can play tricks
and how inexperienced judgment charges ahead with an incomplete impression (it
has certainly happened to me).

The best parts of the book were when Julia would go birding with her husband.
Julia had an intense interest in birds and terrible ability to see and ID them,
and her husband had little interest, but was gifted in spotting them. This
unstable situation led to some tension and brought out a particular kind of
birder's competitiveness and pride in Julia.

I liked this line:

> Not having a nemesis bird is the saddest thing in the world.

Overall, the structure of the book isn't compelling to me; mapping the world of
birds to parts of a life in a memoir (cedar waxwings and anxiety about haircuts,
a displaced spotted towhee and Julia's immigration) didn't add to either the
story of birding or the story of Julia's life. It's a _whole is less than the
sum_ situation.

In Wyoming, I saw the bird I was hoping to see: a western tanager. In fact, Sam
and I saw at least two or three every morning, where they would visit the pine
trees at the stream near our campground. We also saw lazuli buntings and, on the
last day, a mountain bluebird, a bit of sky blue perched on a fence post in
alpine meadows.
