---
title: A short bike trip in Catalunya
date: December 13, 2014
---

I wait in the train station in a little town called Parets for three
hours. There is a young man sitting across from me who speaks English
and explains that the train has stopped due to the weather, high-speed
winds, but he soon leaves, picked up by his girlfriend, leaving me
with no one who speaks English. Someone comes through later, _no seguir_
I catch, we aren't continuing. People look as if to leave but stop
outside and congregate around a man I assume is the conductor. He is
answering questions and all I can make out is that no one knows
anything. I fiddle with my bike and take photos.  Spanish and Catalan
are being spoken very quickly and I hardly understand anything.

Finally the conductor makes an annoucement and everyone begins to
leave. Someone repeats to me, _vas a la rotonda._ We walk to a traffic
circle in the town where a bus picks us up to continue the train's
route north. The bus could fit my bike, to my relief. I sit in the
back next to an old Catalan couple who say something to me about their
suitcases when I get on, I explain I don't speak Catalan and they
smile and wave me into the seat. The bus departs and follows a road
rising up the hillside of the valley. We are headed toward the
mountains in the north.

A man sitting next to me says in English, if you're going to Ripoll,
you need to stay on this bus until Vic, and then take the train to
Ripoll. There's been some sort of accident and the trains aren't
moving through the mountain valley. We talk for a little bit. He asks
me where I'm from. I'm American, too, he says. I've been living
Catalonia for thirty years. I moved in one year after Franco
left. It's been interesting watching this country grow as a new
democracy. He told me his children grew up here and he speaks Catalan
with all of them.

A woman sitting a seat in front of us interrupts in Catalan, and they
talk for a bit, and the man translates for me that she is a concert
violinist and knew of his son, who is a composer living in California,
and apparently well-known here.

Eventually, five hours late, I make it to Ripoll.

![\ ](/images/barca/10122014-P1200945.jpg)

Ripoll is a small town in the foothills of the Pyrenees. Here I visit
the Benedectine monastery Santa Maria de Ripoll.

![\ ](/images/barca/10122014-P1010011.jpg)

![\ ](/images/barca/10122014-P1010016.jpg)

![\ ](/images/barca/10122014-P1200913.jpg)

![\ ](/images/barca/10122014-P1200923.jpg)

![\ ](/images/barca/10122014-P1200935.jpg)

I have breakfast at the hotel, _café con leche_, toasted slices of
bread coated with tomato juice (a Catalan favorite) and a basket full
of local cured hams, with a cutting board and knife to sample them. I
read in the news that the train that had caused my delay was impaled
by a fallen tree and that the injured conductor had his leg amputated.

The hostess is named Aina. Aina, _eye-nah_. I practice saying
Ripoll. _Reepoiyyy_. In the cold air, my tongue begins to flutter
slightly, and suddenly I'm rolling my R's. _Rrrripoy_.

I pack my bike and take the scenic road to Olot, over a low mountain
pass. Four or five cars pass me in as many hours. I clamber up an
outcrop at the top of the pass to take this photo. The only noise in
the still air is cattle bells clanging in the distance.

![\ ](/images/barca/10122014-P1200970.jpg)

![\ ](/images/barca/10122014-P1200977.jpg)

![\ ](/images/barca/10122014-P1200991.jpg)

The first thing I notice about Olot is the smog, hanging low over the
town, punctured by the extinct volcanoes all over the valley.

The second thing I notice, biking into town, is the smell, like
burning oil. I ask a few people about it. One woman claims that it is
just moisture from the streams. Another man didn't seem too
concerned. Olot is a working town, lots of _embutidos_, _jamón_
factories.

I meet a bicyclist, Manel, and we go out for coffee. ¿Qué le gusta?
the waitress asks. _Café amb llet_ says Manel, _café con leche_ I say.
The waitress looks at me and says, _vale, dos cafés con leche_. Ah.

The thing about the _gente_ here, says Manel, is people in Spain
think, oh they just speak Catalaaan out there. But we speak perfect
Spanish! Everyone speaks Catalan with each other, but everyone can
speak Spanish, no problem, we all learned it in school. I don't think
we should be a part of Spain. We are different. This is _catalunya_!

So you voted, Sí, Sí?

Yes, I did. Sí, sí. I think Spain is corrupt. Corrupt politicains,
wasting money. Sure, our politicians are corrupt too, but less. Spain
is in a bad place right now, and we should separate. I moved here, in
Olot, for work. Six months ago. But now it's very bad. I don't know if
I'm gonna have a job much longer. Some days they call me in, some days
no. I don't know when I'm gonna work next.

![\ ](/images/barca/10122014-P1200997.jpg)

![\ ](/images/barca/11122014-P1210032.jpg)

Manel bikes with me down the valley a little, and points me toward
the mountains. You go ahead, he says, I have to get back. Maybe soon I
will have enough time for a long trip. Have you heard of the _camino
santiago_? Yes, I say. The main walk is _camino frances_, and there's
a more difficult one, _camino del norte_, along the coast. It starts along
the border with France, in Basque country. It might take a week or
two. Some day I'll bike or walk that.

I leave Manel and bike up the mountain.

![\ ](/images/barca/11122014-P1210066.jpg)

![\ ](/images/barca/11122014-P1210074.jpg)

The next day I leave Olot and continue to Girona. Most of the route is
on an old railway trail, part of the _vias verdes_ network in
Spain. It follows the valley south and slightly downhill. I can coast
much of the way.

I stop in a village along the way for lunch, and have squid with pesto
and delicious fried potatoes called _patates d'Olot_.

![\ ](/images/barca/12122014-P1210090.jpg)

![\ ](/images/barca/12122014-P1210093.jpg)

![\ ](/images/barca/IMG_0086.jpg)

![\ ](/images/barca/12122014-P1210102.jpg)

In Girona the trip takes an unexpected turn. I meet Pau, who invites me
to stay at his house to have dinner with his wife. The first floor of
Pau's house is a garage filled to the brim with bikes, portable
stoves, scooters, endless tools and odds and ends. This is
very clean for me, he says. Just last week it was impossible to walk
in here. I was building a pipe organ for a circus in France.

Dinner is delicious, some kind of cuttlefish risotto. Our conversation
tends to lapse in and out of English and Spanish. At some point it
turns to _construcción de iglús_, a favorite topic for Pau, as he once
was the president of the local igloo builder's association. Before I
know it I have agreed to let Pau take me up to the mountains in the
morning to teach me to build igloos.

We leave at 7 so that we have enough light.

![\ ](/images/barca/13122014-P1210106.jpg)

![\ ](/images/barca/13122014-P1210108.jpg)

![\ ](/images/barca/13122014-P1210118.jpg)

![\ ](/images/barca/13122014-P1210128.jpg)

There isn't too much snow but we make do with what has collected in a
ditch. Pau lets me place the blocks. I do an OK job: the igloo stands,
but it looks a bit lopsided.

Pau makes lunch, ramen with tuna fish, and espresso, in a beautiful little
portable espresso maker.

![\ ](/images/barca/13122014-P1210144.jpg)

![\ ](/images/barca/13122014-P1210173.jpg)

France is just across the valley, under lenticular clouds. Some day
I'll return and take a proper bike trip over the mountains, perhaps
with Pau as my guide.

[1]: http://www.lavanguardia.com/sucesos/20141209/54421230079/tren-descarrila-viento-conductor-herido.html
