---
title: "A year of rock climbing"
date: 2021-01-10T11:00:00-0400
---

I was in a lucky place to handle 2020. I stayed employed, I could work from
home, I am relatively healthy and young. So when I think of my weekends as
being *hard* and *dark*, because I was unable to see friends and do all the
normal things that made me happy, and because I was at times obsessed with
the news that contributed to a sense of doom, I also have to admit it was
much, much worse for many people.

In any case, it was hard, and I was looking for new routines. By August, I
had one: every weekend with any degree of nice weather I would spend rock
climbing. A core group of my friends formed committed to this. We'd leave
Boston by 8am, get to Rumney, New Hampshire by 10, and spend the entire day
climbing, limited only by the darkness after sunset. Rumney is huge, with
many cliffs to explore, and even at its busiest we could maintain plenty of
distance from other groups.

Sport climbing, for me, is a good balance of relaxation and focused effort,
and of risk and safety. A climb usually takes just a minute or two of
preparation, five to ten minutes of exertion, and then you're done, either
switching to belay or, delightfully, finding a nice spot to rest against a
tree or rock and watch the next climber. The goal is to complete a climb
without falling or hanging at all on the rope (to "send").

A difficult climb feels absolutely impossible at first. "No fucking way" is a
common thought. It's like asking you to swim across the Atlantic, etc: there
is *nothing* in your body to let you do it. And then an interesting thing
happens. You work at it, falling, failing, trying again, trying a different
foothold, finding hidden imperfections in the rock, twisting your hips,
fitting your fingers *just so* along a fold of schist, again and again, and
movement by movement you ascend. You learn that, yes, you can make these
movements with this impossible rock. What you find is that much of climbing
is about understanding what you are capable of, and that what held you back
more than anything else was that you just *didn't know*.

![*Jolt*, Rumney](/images/j/L1006386.jpg)

Meanwhile, while you're resting, you get to watch the peregrine falcons fly
overhead. Sometimes they have something in their talons.

I am grateful to have found this sport. It is the perfect excuse to be
outside, to be with friends, and to get out of the city and away from the
endless news.
